---
# Documentation: https://sourcethemes.com/academic/docs/managing-content/

title: ""
subtitle: ""
summary: ""
authors: []
tags: []
categories: []
date: 2020-08-31T06:49:33-05:00
lastmod: 2020-08-31T06:49:33-05:00
featured: false
draft: false

# Featured image
# To use, add an image named `featured.jpg/png` to your page's folder.
# Focal points: Smart, Center, TopLeft, Top, TopRight, Left, Right, BottomLeft, Bottom, BottomRight.
image:
  caption: ""
  focal_point: ""
  preview_only: false

# Projects (optional).
#   Associate this post with one or more of your projects.
#   Simply enter your project's folder or file name without extension.
#   E.g. `projects = ["internal-project"]` references `content/project/deep-learning/index.md`.
#   Otherwise, set `projects = []`.
projects: []
---

# Mission

The IBDGC has utilized the great wealth of well-characterized patients,
biological samples, and data we have amassed to elucidate the mechanisms by
which associated genetic variants influence pathophysiology. Moving forward,
the IBDGC aims to focus on the following key challenges:

1. Encompassing non-European populations more fully to identify
   cross-population differences in major effect genes as well as rare
   variants, thereby enhancing overall clinical predictions.
2. Integration of precision multi-omic approaches such as single cell RNA
   sequencing, development of enteroid lines, and utilization of sensitive
   protein assays to establish potential targets for novel therapies.
3. Engaging world-class scientists and clinicians in a way that enables
   seamless flow of information in an effort to consolidate data generated by
   ever-expanding technological advances.


# History

The NIDDK Inflammatory Bowel Disease Genetics Consortium (IBDGC) was created
to advance genetic research on Crohn’s Disease (CD) and Ulcerative Colitis
(UC). Over the past 15 years, in collaboration with the International IBD
Genetics Consortium (IIBDGC), we have identified about 200 susceptibility loci
for CD and UC. These newly identified loci have significantly contributed to
our understanding of the roles of the innate and acquired immune systems in
the pathophysiology of IBD.

The IBD Genetics Consortium was started in 2002 by the National Institute of
Diabetes and Digestive and Kidney Diseases (NIDDK). During the first 5 year
funding cycle collections included blood for DNA isolation and lymphoblastoid
cell lines, and clinical phenotype data for affected independent cases,
affected families, and probands with unaffected family controls. We also
established a standard phenotyping manual and forms for IBD. Our Genome Wide
Association Studies (GWAS) were instrumental in identifying top CD associated
loci, specifically NOD2, IL23R and ATG16L1.

Beginning in 2007 collections evolved with the recent genetic findings to
focus primarily on independent cases, and population controls. We continued to
collect blood for DNA isolation and lymphoblastoid cell lines, and added serum
collections. During this time we joined the International IBDGC for several
ground-breaking studies. Our GWAS studies were instrumental in identifying the
top CD and UC associated loci, and have contributed greatly to several
meta-analyses and, specific to CD and UC. These findings allowed us to
collaborate with the auto-immune diseases community to design the ImmunoChip
(iChip). With a combined total of over 75,000 subjects (IBD cases and
controls) the total IBD associated loci to meet genome-wide significance was
brought to 163. In addition we learned that many of these loci overlap with
other auto-immune diseases, and mycobacterial infection.

In 2012 we began adding value to the genetic associations with functional
studies. For this phase we focused on collaborative, multi-disciplinary
studies, designed to elucidate the mechanisms whereby risk-conferring genetic
variants influence IBD pathophysiology. In addition to previous collections,
we began collecting blood for RNA and PBMCs, surgical intestinal tissue and
biopsies, and stool and diet. We continued to build on previous GWAS studies,
with sequencing of additional populations, and more in-depth interrogation of
specific loci with functional studies.

We continue our focus on functional studies to elucidate the mechanisms
whereby risk-conferring genetic variants influence IBD pathophysiology. With a
solid understanding of genetic associations for IBD in European ancestry
populations, one of our goals for the current phase is to expand IBD genetics
to non-European populations. We will augment IBD resources and studies by
reaching out to additional collaborators. Additional grant support from NIDDK
via the ancillary R01 and R21 mechanism will expedite these collaborations.
